---
title: "Using QUIC to traverse NATs"
abbrev: "QUIC NAT Traversal"
category: std

docname: draft-seemann-quic-nat-traversal-latest
submissiontype: IETF
consensus: true
v: 3
area: "Transport"
workgroup: "QUIC"
keyword:
 - QUIC
 - ICE
 - NAT traversal
 - hole punching

author:
 -
    fullname: Marten Seemann
    organization: Protocol Labs
    email: martenseemann@gmail.com

normative:

informative:


--- abstract

QUIC is well-suited to various NAT traversal techniques. As it operates over
UDP, and because the QUIC header was designed to be demultipexed from other
protocols, STUN can be used on the same UDP socket. This allows for using ICE
with QUIC. Furthermore, QUIC’s path validation mechanism can be used to test the
viability of an address candidate pair, allowing the immediate use of a new
path.

--- middle

# Introduction

This document defines three distinct modes for traversing NATs using QUIC
({{!RFC9000}}):

1. Using ICE ({{!RFC8445}}) with an external signaling channel to select a pair
   of UDP addresses. Once candidate nomination is completed, a new QUIC
   connection between the two endpoints can be established.
2. Using a (proxied) QUIC connection as the signaling channel for ICE. Once ICE
   has nominated a candidate pair (i.e., selected a usable path), the proxied
   connection is migrated using QUIC’s connection migration.
3. Using a (proxied) QUIC connection as the signaling channel for ICE. Instead
   of using ICE's connectivity checks, QUIC's path validation logic is used to
   determine possible paths.

The first mode doesn't require any changes to existing QUIC and ICE stacks. The
only requirement is the ability to send non-QUIC (STUN ({{!RFC5389}})) packets
on the UDP socket that a QUIC server is listening on. However, it necessitates
running a separate signaling channel for the communication between the two ICE
agents.

The second mode requires a minor modification of the QUIC stacks involved, as
they now need to be capable of exchanging ICE messages on top of the proxied
QUIC connection. This is achieved by defining an ICE frame to carry these
messages. This mode makes it possible to start exchanging application data (via
QUIC streams) on the proxied connection. The migration event is transparent to
the application.

The third mode necessitates changes to both the QUIC and ICE stacks. The ICE
delegates responsibility for performing connectivity checks to the QUIC stack.
The QUIC stack utilizes QUIC's path validation logic to perform the connectivity
check. In addition to the path validation mechanism described in {{!RFC9000}},
the QUIC server needs the capability to initiate path validation, which, as per
{{!RFC9000}}, is solely executed by the client. Compared to the second mode,
this mode elimitates the need to effectively probe a path twice (once at the ICE
and once at the QUIC layer), leading to a faster connection migration.

# Modes

## Using an External Signaling Channel

When an external signaling channel is used, the QUIC connection is established
after the two ICE agents have agreed on a candidate pair. This mode doesn't
require any modification to existing QUIC stacks, particularly, it does not
necessitate the negotiation of the ICE extension defined in this document.

Once ICE has completed, the client immediately initiates a normal QUIC handshake
using the server's address from the nominated address pair. The ICE connectivity
checks should have created the necessary NAT bindings for the client's first
flight to reach the server, and for the server's first flight to reach the
client.

## Using a QUIC Connection as a Signaling Channel, using ICE for Connectivity Checks

A (proxied) QUIC connection (e.g. using CONNECT-UDP ({{!RFC9298}})) can be used
as the signaling channel required by the ICE protocol (see section 1 of
{{!RFC8445}}). ICE messages are sent on this QUIC connection using the ICE frame
defined in this document. This mode requires the ICE extension defined in this
document to be negotiated ({{negotiating-extension-use}}). Implementions MAY use
Trickle ICE ({{!RFC8838}}) to speed up the exchange of address candidates.

Once ICE has successfully nominated a candidate pair, this path can be used as a
direct connection between the two endpoints. The client SHOULD initiate a QUIC
connection migration (section 9 of {{!RFC9000}}) in a timely manner. The ICE
connectivity check should have created all the NAT bindings needed for the QUIC
path validation to complete successfully, however, these NAT bindings are
usually only valid for a limited amount of time.

## Using a QUIC Connection as a Signaling Channel, using QUIC for Connectivity Checks

Similar to mode 2, in this mode a (proxied) QUIC connection is used as the ICE
signaling channel. Instead of performing the connectivy checks (section 7 of
{{!RFC8445}}) themselves, the ICE stacks delegates them to the QUIC stack.

The QUIC client MUST ensure that it ends up as the controlling agent (see
section 2.3 of {{!RFC8445}}). This can be achieved by sending the maximum
allowed value for the tiebreaker value (see section 7.3.1. of {{!RFC8445}}).

When the ICE stack requests to perform a connectivity check for an address
candidate pair, each QUIC endpoint probes the path by sending a probing packet
containing a PATH_CHALLENGE frames, as described in section 8.2 of {{!RFC9000}}.
Note that this differs slightly from {{!RFC9000}}, where only the client sends a
probing packet. To create the required NAT bindings, it's necessary for both
endpoints to send packets.

Upon the completion of path validation, the QUIC stack passes the result
(successful or failed) back to the ICE stack. The ICE stack then nominates an
address pair. The client SHOULD then migrate the QUIC connection to this path in
a timely manner.

# Negotiating Extension Use

Endpoints advertise their support of the extension needed for mode 2 and 3 by
sending the ice (0x3d7e9f0bca12fea6) transport parameter (section 7.4 of
{{!RFC9000}}) with an empty value. An implementation that understands this
transport parameter MUST treat the receipt of a non-empty value as a connection
error of type TRANSPORT_PARAMETER_ERROR.

In order to the use of this extension in 0-RTT packets, the client MUST remember
the value of this transport parameter. If 0-RTT data is accepted by the server,
the server MUST not disable this extension on the resumed connection.

# ICE Frame

~~~
ICE Frame {
    Type (i) = 0x1ce,
    Length (i),
    Data (...),
}
~~~

The ICE frame contains the following fields:

Length: A variable-length integer encoding the length of the following Data field.

Data: The ICE message.

If the Length is larger than the remaining payload of the QUIC packet, the
receiver MUST close the connection with a connection error of type
FRAME_ENCODING_ERROR.

ICE frames are ack-eliciting. When lost, they MUST NOT be retransmitted, as the
ICE layer is handling retransmission of messages.

# Conventions and Definitions

{::boilerplate bcp14-tagged}


# Security Considerations

TODO Security


# IANA Considerations

This document has no IANA actions.


--- back

# Acknowledgments
{:numbered="false"}

TODO acknowledge.
